---
layout: post
title: Code Conduct
description: Trudging Along
categories: blogging, coding
---
I’ve been thinking about this idea of obfuscation in software a lot this week, knowing that this is crucial to making code human readable. Bad code is always easier to write, and with less limitations I am able to force things into working. However, this almost always renders my code less repeatable and therefore less usable. I get hung up on this in a big way, and though I know we are expected to write a bit at a time, I become easily obsessed with getting things right, being a little more creative, or incorporating code outside of our dailies’ purview. For instance, I have been trying (too hard) to incorporate an outside image into my “a lot of something” daily and have some real difficulty understanding the concept on the p5.js library. I understand the path for the image needs to be in the HTML file that links to my sketch, but I’m not sure where how to add that to my index.html.

Coding can be frustrating because it demands rote learning on some level, while asking the programmer to keep things causal and logical. I try and keep these two demands in mind, but get irritated every time I have to reference some basic aspect of java script, or have to be shown the way directly. Another problem is that somewhere along the way, I abandoned the p5.js editor to start working exclusively in ATOM. I may have made this move prematurely since working in a new environment has been a bit jarring. I had to figure out how to get line numbers to display on my screen. Imagine having to work without them! I have not given up on making something of this time and effort, and will achieve coding Zen just yet. Articulating my experiences on this blog helps ease the pain considerably. I look forward to seeing everyone in class tomorrow.
